Background
----------

We are all related through our common ancestry. Because of this, our genomes are similar and the paths of our lives follow similar trajectories. Medicine needs to learn the general patterns of genetics and health so that it can provide a powerful and precise health infrastructure. To accomplish this, scientists must have access to genome and health information from many millions of people to perform analyses that will reveal relationships between genomics and health.  The challenge is to provide this information to scientists while protecting the privacy of the people who donate their genetic and health information.

Abstractly, we can think of this information as a giant table of data with 1 million rows. Each row of the table contains all the information for a single individual (“participant”). The data values in the row associated with a participant include very sensitive private information, such as the participant’s name, and not quite as sensitive personal information, such as specific genetic variants that the participant has at different locations in the genome, and phenotype values like the participant’s gender or age, the results of certain clinical tests, and a physician’s diagnosis. Each of the latter carries no personal significance when shared in isolation from the participant’s other information. The rows of the table are not all gathered in one central location. Rather, there are a set of perhaps 1,000 medical institutions, patient advocacy groups and other similar entities that participants interact with, collectively called “trusted stewards”, each of which separately holds approximately 1,000 rows of the table. We will refer to the whole table as the “virtual big table” because it never actually exists as a table in any central location. 

The collective of stewards works together to help medical researchers learn the connections between genetics and health, while at the same time each steward takes steps to protect the privacy of their participants.  First, to help researchers, the stewards collectively “publish”  small sets of columns from the virtual big table, called “packets”, into a separate open dataset in the form of a public ledger [cites] so that anybody can access and use this information. Typically a packet will consist of the genetic information columns pertaining to a single gene, and the columns for a small set of phenotypes. For example, a packet could contain the information about genetic variation in several (or all) positions within a gene like BRCA, plus the gender, age and time of diagnosis for a certain disease like breast cancer.  Many different packets are published to the public ledger, each containing a different combination of columns of less sensitive data from the virtual big table. Columns can appear in more than one packet. To protect participant privacy, the overlap structure of the packets is constrained (discussed further below), and each row of a packet is represented by a different random ID substituting for the patient’s unique personal identifying information, with these IDs varying from packet to packet. The association between the participant and the many different random IDs used to represent them in the different packets is known only to the participant and the participant’ steward. The structure of the packets is maintained so that the full rows of the big table cannot be determined by clever analysis that “links” the information in separate packets, as this would be considered a privacy violation. The public ledger is available to all to address specific medical questions related to the columns that are present in specific packets. 

Second, the stewards work together to answer more complicated questions posed by researchers, questions that cannot be answered from any individual packet that has been published to date.  These questions typically take the form of computing correlations between or performing regressions on small combinations of columns from the virtual big table, columns that have not previously been combined and published as a packet. We assume there will be many such questions, possibly complex questions, so that it would not be safe from a privacy perspective to simply publish a new packet containing the required columns for each of them. Instead, the stewards work together under the framework of secure multiparty computation to perform the computation requested, and then share only the result of the computation, not the “virtual packet” of information that underlies it (i.e. the packet containing the columns involved in the query).  Stewards exchange minimal information between them during this computation. It is up to the stewards to decide if the question posed by the researcher has scientific value outweighing the incremental disclosure of information between them or publicly from its answer. Stewards can each decide individually whether to participate in a given type of scientific enquiry, and can consult or pre-consent their participants as to whether to do so as well.
